add page on pow v pos (#8642)
ethereum/ethereum-org-website: src/content/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pos/pos-vs-pow/index.md

---
title: Proof-of-stake vs proof-of-work
description: A comparison between Ethereum's proof-of-stake and proof-of-work based consensus mechanism
lang: en
---

Ethereum is a proof-of-stake blockchain. This has not always been the case. When Ethereum launched, proof-of-stake still needed a lot of research and development before it could be trusted to secure the real public network. Proof-of-work, however, was a simpler mechanism that had already been proven by Bitcoin, meaning it could be implemented right away to get the network off the ground. It took a further eight years to develop proof-of-stake to the point where it could be implemented.

This page aims to explain the rationale behind Ethereum's switch to proof-of-stake from proof-of-work and explain the trade-offs.

> We also recommend watching this proof-of-work vs proof-of-stake [debate](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1m12zgJ42dI&t=3410s) from Bankless.

Reviewer: I'd move this to further reading or [embed it at the end of the page](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pos/#visual-learner) personally. 

```suggestion
We also recommend watching this proof-of-work vs proof-of-stake [debate](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1m12zgJ42dI&t=3410s) from Bankless.
```

## Security {#security}

> Overall, proof-of-stake is thought to be more secure than proof-of-work. However, it has only recently been implemented for the real Ethereum Mainnet and is not as "[Lindy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lindy_effect)" as proof-of-work. The following sections discuss the pro's and cons of proof-of-stake's security model compared to proof-of-work.

Reviewer: > not as "[Lindy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lindy_effect)"

We should explain what we mean by this

Author: ```suggestion
Overall, proof-of-stake is thought to be more secure than proof-of-work. However, it has only recently been implemented for the real Ethereum Mainnet and is not as "[Lindy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lindy_effect)" as proof-of-work, meaning it has not been as time-proven. The following sections discuss the pro's and cons of proof-of-stake's security model compared to proof-of-work.
```

The gold standard for Ethereum is for validators to be run locally on home computers, maximizing decentralization. This is why Ethereum resists changes that increase the hardware requirements for running a node/validator.

## Sustainability {#sustainability}

Proof-of-stake is a carbon-cheap way to secure the blockchain. Under proof-of-work miners compete for the right to mine a block. Miners are more successful when they can perform calculations faster, incentivizing investment in hardware and energy consumption. This was observed for Ethereum before it switched to proof-of-stake. Shortly before the transition to proof-of-stake, Ethereum was consuming approximately 78 TWh/yr - as much as a small country. However, switching to proof-of-stake reduced this energy expenditure by ~99.98%. Proof-of-stake made Ethereum an energy-efficient, low carbon platform.

More on [Ethereum's energy consumption](/energy-consumption)

> ## Issuance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Issuance {#issuance}
```

Proof-of-stake Ethereum can pay for its security by issing far fewer coins than proof-of-work Ethereum because validators do not have to pay high electricity costs. This means ETH can be less inflationary, or even deflationary when large amounts of ETH are burned. This means proof-of-stake Ethereum's security is cheaper than under proof-of-work.

> ## Further Reading {#further-reading}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Further reading {#further-reading}
```

> [Vitalik's Proof-of-stake design philosophy](https://medium.com/@VitalikButerin/a-proof-of-stake-design-philosophy-506585978d51)
> [Vitalik's proof-of-stake FAQs](https://vitalik.ca/general/2017/12/31/pos_faq.html#what-is-proof-of-stake)
> ["Simply Explained" video on pos vs pow](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M3EFi_POhps)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Vitalik's proof-of-stake design philosophy](https://medium.com/@VitalikButerin/a-proof-of-stake-design-philosophy-506585978d51)
- [Vitalik's proof-of-stake FAQs](https://vitalik.ca/general/2017/12/31/pos_faq.html#what-is-proof-of-stake)
- ["Simply Explained" video on pos vs pow](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M3EFi_POhps)
```

### Attack surface {#attack-surface}

> Proof-of-stake is more complex than proof-of-work, which means there are more potential attack vectors to handle. Instead of one peer-to-peer network connecting clients, there are two, each implementing a separate protocol. Having one specific validator pre-selected to propose a block in each slot creates the potential for denial-of-service where that specific validator is knocked out by large amounts of network traffic. There are also ways that attackers can carefully time the release of their blocks or attestations so that they are received by a certain proportion of the honest network, influencing them to vote in certain ways. Finally, an attacker can simply accumulate sufficient ETH to stake and dominate the consensus mechanism. Each of these attack vectors have associated defenses - read more on the [attack and defense page](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pos/attack-and-defense) - but they do not exist to be defended at all under proof-of-work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Proof-of-stake is more complex than proof-of-work, which means there are more potential attack vectors to handle. Instead of one peer-to-peer network connecting clients, there are two, each implementing a separate protocol. Having one specific validator pre-selected to propose a block in each slot creates the potential for denial-of-service where large amounts of network traffic knock that specific validator offline. 

There are also ways that attackers can carefully time the release of their blocks or attestations so that they are received by a certain proportion of the honest network, influencing them to vote in certain ways. Finally, an attacker can simply accumulate sufficient ETH to stake and dominate the consensus mechanism. Each of these [attack vectors has associated defenses](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pos/attack-and-defense), but they do not exist to be defended under proof-of-work.
```

---
title: Proof-of-stake vs proof-of-work
description: A comparison between Ethereum's proof-of-stake and proof-of-work based consensus mechanism
lang: en
---

When Ethereum launched, proof-of-stake still needed a lot of research and development before it could be trusted to secure Ethereum. Proof-of-work was a simpler mechanism that had already been proven by Bitcoin, meaning core developers could implement it right away to Ethereum launched. It took a further eight years to develop proof-of-stake to the point where it could be implemented.

This page explains the rationale behind Ethereum's switch to proof-of-stake from proof-of-work and the trade-offs involved.

## Security {#security}

Ethereum researchers consider proof-of-stake more secure than proof-of-work. However, it has only recently been implemented for the real Ethereum Mainnet and is less time-proven than proof-of-work. The following sections discuss the pros and cons of proof-of-stake's security model compared to proof-of-work.

### Cost to attack {#cost-to-attack}

> In proof-of-stake, validators are required to escrow ("stake") at least 32 ETH in a smart contract. The staked ETH can then be destroyed to punish validators that misbehave. In order to come to consensus, at least 66% of the total staked ether has to vote in favour of a particular set of blocks. Blocks voted for by >=66% of the stake become "finalized" meaning they can't be removed or reorganized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In proof-of-stake, validators are required to escrow ("stake") at least 32 ETH in a smart contract. Ethereum can destroy staked ether to punish validators that misbehave. To come to consensus, at least 66% of the total staked ether has to vote in favour of a particular set of blocks. Blocks voted for by >=66% of the stake become "finalized", meaning they can't be removed or reorganized.
```

> Attacking the network can mean preventing the chain from finalizing, or ensuring a certain organization of blocks in the canonical chain that somehow benefits an attacker. This requires the attacker to divert the path of honest consensus either by accumulating a large amount of ether and voting with it directly, or tricking honest validators to vote in a particular way. Sophisticated, low probability attacks that trick honest validators aside, the cost to attack Ethereum is the cost of the stake that an attacker has to accumulate to influence consensus in their favour.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Attacking the network can mean preventing the chain from finalizing or ensuring a certain organization of blocks in the canonical chain that somehow benefits an attacker. This requires the attacker to divert the path of honest consensus either by accumulating a large amount of ether and voting with it directly or tricking honest validators into voting in a particular way. Sophisticated, low-probability attacks that trick honest validators aside, the cost to attack Ethereum is the cost of the stake that an attacker has to accumulate to influence consensus in their favour.
```

> The lowest cost of attack is >33% of the total stake. An attacker holding >33% of the total stake can cause a finality delay simply by going offline. This is a fairly minor problem for the network as there is a mechanism known as the "inactivity leak" that leaks stake away from offline validators until the online majority represent 66% of the stake and can finalize the chain again. It is also theoretically possible for an attacker to cause double finality with a little over 33% of the total stake by creating two blocks instead of one when they are asked to be a block producer, and then double vote with all of their validators. Each fork only requires 50% of the remaining honest validators to see each block first, so if they manage to time their messages just right, they may be able to finalize both forks. This has low likelihood of success, but in the event that an attacker was able to cause double-finality, the Ethereum community would have to make a decision to follow one or other fork, in which case the attackers validators would necessarily be slashed on the other.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The lowest cost of attack is >33% of the total stake. An attacker holding >33% of the total stake can cause a finality delay simply by going offline. This is a relatively minor problem for the network as there is a mechanism known as the "inactivity leak" that leaks stake away from offline validators until the online majority represents 66% of the stake and can finalize the chain again. It is also theoretically possible for an attacker to cause double finality with a little over 33% of the total stake by creating two blocks instead of one when they are asked to be a block producer and then double-vote with all of their validators. Each fork only requires 50% of the remaining honest validators to see each block first, so if they manage to time their messages just right, they may be able to finalize both forks. This has a low likelihood of success, but if an attacker was able to cause double-finality, the Ethereum community would have to decide to follow one fork, in which case the attacker's validators would necessarily be slashed on the other.
```

> With >33% of the total stake an attacker has a chance to have a minor (finality delay) or more severe (double finality) effect on the Ethereum network. With more than 14,000,000 ETH staked on the network and a representative price of $1000/ETH, the minimum cost to mount these attacks is `1000 x 14,000,000 x 0.33 = $4,620,000,000`. The attacker would lose this money through slashing and also be ejected from the network. In order to attack again, they would have to accumulate >33% of the stake again, and burn it again. Each attempt to attack the network would cost >$4.6 billion (at $1000/ETH and 14M ETH staked). The attacker is also ejected from the network when they are slashed and they have to join an activation queue to rejoin. This means the rate of repeat attack is limited not only to the rate the attacker can accumulate >33% of the total stake but also the time it takes to onboard all their validators onto the network. Each time the attacker attacks they get a lot poorer and the rest of the community get richer thanks to the resulting supply shock.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With >33% of the total stake, an attacker has a chance to have a minor (finality delay) or more severe (double finality) effect on the Ethereum network. With more than 14,000,000 ETH staked on the network and a representative price of $1000/ETH, the minimum cost to mount these attacks is `1000 x 14,000,000 x 0.33 = $4,620,000,000`. The attacker would lose this money through slashing and get ejected from the network. To attack again, they would have to accumulate >33% of the stake (again) and burn it (again). Each attempt to attack the network would cost >$4.6 billion (at $1000/ETH and 14M ETH staked). The attacker is also ejected from the network when they are slashed, and they have to join an activation queue to rejoin. This means the rate of a repeat attack is limited not only to the rate the attacker can accumulate >33% of the total stake but also the time it takes to onboard all their validators onto the network. Each time the attacker attacks, they get much poorer, and the rest of the community gets richer, thanks to the resulting supply shock.
```

> Other attacks, such as 51% attacks or finality reversion with 66% of the total stake require substantially more ETH and are therefore much more costly to the attacker.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other attacks, such as 51% attacks or finality reversion with 66% of the total stake, require substantially more ETH and are much more costly to the attacker.
```

> In proof-of-stake, validators are required to escrow ("stake") at least 32 ETH in a smart contract. Ethereum can destroy staked ether to punish validators that misbehave. To come to consensus, at least 66% of the total staked ether has to vote in favour of a particular set of blocks. Blocks voted for by >=66% of the stake become "finalized", meaning they can't be removed or reorganized.
> 
> Attacking the network can mean preventing the chain from finalizing or ensuring a certain organization of blocks in the canonical chain that somehow benefits an attacker. This requires the attacker to divert the path of honest consensus either by accumulating a large amount of ether and voting with it directly or tricking honest validators into voting in a particular way. Sophisticated, low-probability attacks that trick honest validators aside, the cost to attack Ethereum is the cost of the stake that an attacker has to accumulate to influence consensus in their favour.
> 
> The lowest cost of attack is >33% of the total stake. An attacker holding >33% of the total stake can cause a finality delay simply by going offline. This is a relatively minor problem for the network as there is a mechanism known as the "inactivity leak" that leaks stake away from offline validators until the online majority represents 66% of the stake and can finalize the chain again. It is also theoretically possible for an attacker to cause double finality with a little over 33% of the total stake by creating two blocks instead of one when they are asked to be a block producer and then double-vote with all of their validators. Each fork only requires 50% of the remaining honest validators to see each block first, so if they manage to time their messages just right, they may be able to finalize both forks. This has a low likelihood of success, but if an attacker was able to cause double-finality, the Ethereum community would have to decide to follow one fork, in which case the attacker's validators would necessarily be slashed on the other.
> 
> With >33% of the total stake, an attacker has a chance to have a minor (finality delay) or more severe (double finality) effect on the Ethereum network. With more than 14,000,000 ETH staked on the network and a representative price of $1000/ETH, the minimum cost to mount these attacks is `1000 x 14,000,000 x 0.33 = $4,620,000,000`. The attacker would lose this money through slashing and get ejected from the network. To attack again, they would have to accumulate >33% of the stake (again) and burn it (again). Each attempt to attack the network would cost >$4.6 billion (at $1000/ETH and 14M ETH staked). The attacker is also ejected from the network when they are slashed, and they have to join an activation queue to rejoin. This means the rate of a repeat attack is limited not only to the rate the attacker can accumulate >33% of the total stake but also the time it takes to onboard all their validators onto the network. Each time the attacker attacks, they get much poorer, and the rest of the community gets richer, thanks to the resulting supply shock.
> 
> Other attacks, such as 51% attacks or finality reversion with 66% of the total stake, require substantially more ETH and are much more costly to the attacker.
> 
> Compare this to proof-of-work. The cost of launching an attack on proof-of-work Ethereum was the cost of consistently owning >50% of the total network hash rate. This amounted to the hardware and running costs of sufficient computing power to outcompete other miners to compute proof-of-work solutions consistently. Ethereum was mostly mined using GPUs rather than ASICs, which kept the cost down (although had Ethereum stayed on proof-of-work, ASIC mining may have become more popular). An adversary would have to purchase a lot of hardware and pay for the electricity to run it to attack a proof-of-work Ethereum network, but the total cost would be less than the cost required to accumulate enough ETH to launch an attack. A 51% attack is ~[20x less](https://youtu.be/1m12zgJ42dI?t=1562) expensive on proof-of-work than proof-of-stake. If the attack was detected and the chain hard-forked to remove their changes, the attacker could repeatedly use the same hardware to attack the new fork.

Reviewer: This section is pretty long. What do you think about breaking it up with some H4s?

Suggested:

- What is an attack
- 33% attacks
- 51% attacks

```suggestion
In proof-of-stake, validators are required to escrow ("stake") at least 32 ETH in a smart contract. Ethereum can destroy staked ether to punish validators that misbehave. To come to consensus, at least 66% of the total staked ether has to vote in favour of a particular set of blocks. Blocks voted for by >=66% of the stake become "finalized", meaning they can't be removed or reorganized.

#### What is an attack {#what-is-an-attack}

Attacking the network can mean preventing the chain from finalizing or ensuring a certain organization of blocks in the canonical chain that somehow benefits an attacker. This requires the attacker to divert the path of honest consensus either by accumulating a large amount of ether and voting with it directly or tricking honest validators into voting in a particular way. Sophisticated, low-probability attacks that trick honest validators aside, the cost to attack Ethereum is the cost of the stake that an attacker has to accumulate to influence consensus in their favour.

#### 33% attacks {#33-percent-attacks}

The lowest cost of attack is >33% of the total stake. An attacker holding >33% of the total stake can cause a finality delay simply by going offline. This is a relatively minor problem for the network as there is a mechanism known as the "inactivity leak" that leaks stake away from offline validators until the online majority represents 66% of the stake and can finalize the chain again. It is also theoretically possible for an attacker to cause double finality with a little over 33% of the total stake by creating two blocks instead of one when they are asked to be a block producer and then double-vote with all of their validators. Each fork only requires 50% of the remaining honest validators to see each block first, so if they manage to time their messages just right, they may be able to finalize both forks. This has a low likelihood of success, but if an attacker was able to cause double-finality, the Ethereum community would have to decide to follow one fork, in which case the attacker's validators would necessarily be slashed on the other.

With >33% of the total stake, an attacker has a chance to have a minor (finality delay) or more severe (double finality) effect on the Ethereum network. With more than 14,000,000 ETH staked on the network and a representative price of $1000/ETH, the minimum cost to mount these attacks is `1000 x 14,000,000 x 0.33 = $4,620,000,000`. The attacker would lose this money through slashing and get ejected from the network. To attack again, they would have to accumulate >33% of the stake (again) and burn it (again). Each attempt to attack the network would cost >$4.6 billion (at $1000/ETH and 14M ETH staked). The attacker is also ejected from the network when they are slashed, and they have to join an activation queue to rejoin. This means the rate of a repeat attack is limited not only to the rate the attacker can accumulate >33% of the total stake but also the time it takes to onboard all their validators onto the network. Each time the attacker attacks, they get much poorer, and the rest of the community gets richer, thanks to the resulting supply shock.

#### 51% attacks {#51-percent-attacks}

Other attacks, such as 51% attacks or finality reversion with 66% of the total stake, require substantially more ETH and are much more costly to the attacker.

Compare this to proof-of-work. The cost of launching an attack on proof-of-work Ethereum was the cost of consistently owning >50% of the total network hash rate. This amounted to the hardware and running costs of sufficient computing power to outcompete other miners to compute proof-of-work solutions consistently. Ethereum was mostly mined using GPUs rather than ASICs, which kept the cost down (although had Ethereum stayed on proof-of-work, ASIC mining may have become more popular). An adversary would have to purchase a lot of hardware and pay for the electricity to run it to attack a proof-of-work Ethereum network, but the total cost would be less than the cost required to accumulate enough ETH to launch an attack. A 51% attack is ~[20x less](https://youtu.be/1m12zgJ42dI?t=1562) expensive on proof-of-work than proof-of-stake. If the attack was detected and the chain hard-forked to remove their changes, the attacker could repeatedly use the same hardware to attack the new fork.
```

> Compare this to proof-of-work. The cost of launching an attack on proof-of-work Ethereum was the cost of consistently owning >50% of the total network hashrate. This amounted to the hardware and running costs of sufficient computing power to consistently outcompete other miners to compute proof-of-work solutions. Ethereum was mostly mined using GPUs rather than ASICs, which kept the cost down a lot (although had Ethereum stayed on proof-of-work ASIC mining may well have become more popular). An adversary would have to purchase a lot of hardware and pay for the electricity to run it in order to attack a proof-of-work Ethereum network, but the total cost would be less than the cost required to accumulate enough ETH to launch an attack. A 51% attack is ~[20x less](https://youtu.be/1m12zgJ42dI?t=1562) expensive on proof-of-work than proof-of-stake. If the attack was detected and the chain hard-forked to remove their changes, the attacker could keep using the same hardware to attack the new fork again, and again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Compare this to proof-of-work. The cost of launching an attack on proof-of-work Ethereum was the cost of consistently owning >50% of the total network hash rate. This amounted to the hardware and running costs of sufficient computing power to outcompete other miners to compute proof-of-work solutions consistently. Ethereum was mostly mined using GPUs rather than ASICs, which kept the cost down (although had Ethereum stayed on proof-of-work, ASIC mining may have become more popular). An adversary would have to purchase a lot of hardware and pay for the electricity to run it to attack a proof-of-work Ethereum network, but the total cost would be less than the cost required to accumulate enough ETH to launch an attack. A 51% attack is ~[20x less](https://youtu.be/1m12zgJ42dI?t=1562) expensive on proof-of-work than proof-of-stake. If the attack was detected and the chain hard-forked to remove their changes, the attacker could repeatedly use the same hardware to attack the new fork.
```
